# Research on Team Decision Making

> "Because the modern organization consists of knowledge specialists, it has to be an organization of equals, of colleagues and associates. No knowledge ranks higher than another; each is judged by its contribution to the common task rather than by any inherent superiority or inferiority. Therefore, the modern organization cannot be an organization of boss and subordinate. It must be organized as a team." <br>
(Drucker, 1992)

In this project, I present empirical studies that contribute to an increasingly important research area: team effectiveness in the context of knowledge work. My findings demonstrate that self-organized teams are capable of making better decisions on the basis of distributed knowledge than hierarchically structured teams. This yields actionable insights for the future implementation of self-organized teams in modern organizations.

In response to a growing competition and pressure to innovate, organizations have started to structure work around groups of multiple employees. Instead of breaking down tasks into individual pieces, larger clusters of tasks are assigned to teams of knowledge workers with different fields of expertise. This shift in work design is supposed to provide organizations with an increased access to the expertise and knowledge of their workforce [(Kellermanns, Floyd, Pearson, & Spencer, 2008)](https://doi.org/10.1002/job.497). Teams are assumed to integrate multiple perspectives and different skill sets into high quality decisions and innovative products [(Brodbeck, Kerschreiter, Mojzisch, & Schulz-Hardt, 2007)](https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2007.24351441). However, research has repeatedly cast doubt on the intuitive expectation that groups benefit from a lager body of knowledge and collective processing of information. Not only do their members often succumb to cognitive biases when processing available information (e.g., [Fischer, Greitemeyer, & Frey, 2008](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.382); [Janis, 1982](https://fu-berlin.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=FUB_ALMA_DS21879601580002883&context=L&vid=FUB&lang=de_DE&search_scope=FUB_ALL&adaptor=Local%20Search%20Engine&tab=fub&query=any,contains,9780395331897); [Kray & Galinsky, 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-5978(02)00534-4)), they also most commonly fail to disseminate unshared information in the first place (e.g., [Stasser & Titus, 1985](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.48.6.1467); for a review, see [Wittenbaum & Park, 2001](https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.00118)).

In order to improve team performance, organizations typically invest in optimizing team composition. Attracting the greatest talents, selecting team members based on cultural fit, or ensuring diversity are popular examples of how companies try to influence their teams’ functioning (e.g., [Bell, 2007](https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.3.595); [Moreland, 2006](https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/45985072/Being_better_by_being_right_Group_dynami20160527-19162-1yy34ax.pdf?1464333770=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DBeing_better_by_being_right_Subjective_g.pdf&Expires=1597239867&Signature=Am8rDZDI-YizBSdus0pNLZQVXpYLDxh56yG692ZS1s7DoyygC~rnMqt3LWPY2LvPvKhgTTFtEKkhHqvNlSSDcnJMWfj5vk~3xGy-HVJJ4WcIKhIcDUGA3jVoew23qwpADYIJTQqCZ1B9SnDhdT1~PeGbmmCqN35fg4HhRMW0GPcSyi3~5OFVhiULp6JuKnsOFRzuRo0l1jRRB3V8F4xvqJFNlWOWAkuZcmGJhZeMDatX4zLH9tAMKU54QrnAc8cUha1jEHHy9YOQ9IanvqN5OxTGg3wS6CXOhJeECw28h9vcORbEkXv-sYr4-WH5Mj1rFJ9zv7NdLuMTZiWE8tztTQ__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA#page=344)). Yet, in order to actually reach superior solutions, knowledge worker teams must also coordinate their distributed expertise, share information effectively, and integrate individual viewpoints into their final decisions. Thus, it is equally important to learn which structures and processes help these teams – once they are set up – to actually pool their informational resources. While researchers have started to study the impact of structural components on team performance, inconsistent findings call for a deeper understanding of the factors that determine when and why these components should be employed.

The present research aims to enrich our understanding of how teams should be structured internally to make high quality decisions. It focuses on fundamental group structures and members’ collective knowledge structure while taking the conditions of the modern workplace into account. Two studies provide much needed empirical data by directly comparing the decision making performance of self-organized versus hierarchically structured teams. In addition, the studies give insights into the role of meta-knowledge structures, as defined by a *transactive memory system* (TMS), in group decision making. A TMS describes the collective processes of encoding, storing, and retrieving information in groups. It has two major components: (1) a structure which involves a shared, organized store of knowledge, and (2) knowledge-relevant processes ([Wegner, 1986](https://www.scirp.org/(S(351jmbntvnsjt1aadkposzje))/reference/ReferencesPapers.aspx?ReferenceID=1323329); [Wegner, 1995](https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.1995.13.3.319)). More precisely, “the TMS structure is a knowledge representation of members’ unique and shared knowledge (including members’ shared understanding of who knows what).TMS processes are the mechanisms by which the group coordinates members’ learning and retrieval of knowledge, so that the knowledge can be applied to group tasks” ([Lewis & Herndon, 2011](https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1110.0647), p. 1256).

In the following sections, I will outline each study. The analyses for these studies can be found [here](https://github.com/MagdalenaHawthorne/Team-Decision-Making-Research/tree/master/exp_analyses) and here. 


## Study I 
### The Effects of Group Structure and Transactive Memory System on Group Decision Making Under Conditions of Distributed Knowledge 

In this study, I examined the causal effects of group structure and transactive memory system (TMS) on decision quality under conditions of distributed knowledge. Employing the *hidden profile paradigm* ([Stasser & Titus, 1985](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.48.6.1467)), I conducted a group experiment in the laboratory. Groups had to solve a decision making task that necessitated the exchange of information in order to reach the best result. I manipulated both **group structure** (self-organized *vs.* hierarchically structured) and **knowledge structure** (with TMS *vs.* without TMS), which resulted in a 2x2 factorial design. Forming three-person groups, a total of 267 participants (154 women, 113 men) were recruited at multiple universities. The results of this experiment revealed two main effects. First, decision quality was higher in self-organized than in hierarchically structured groups. Second, groups with TMS made better decisions on average than groups without TMS. Both effects were found to be mediated by improved information sharing among group members. Specifically, group members’ detrimental bias towards already shared information (e.g., [Schulz-Hardt, Brodbeck, Mojzisch, Kerschreiter, & Frey, 2006](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.91.6.1080)) was attenuated by a self-organized group structure as well as by the development of a TMS.

## Study II 
### Assessment of Decision Quality and Knowledge Sharing in Existing Knowledge Worker Teams: The Role of Team Structure and Transactive Memory Systems

Using field data from a large organization, I tested a path model that was derived from the experimental findings in study I. This two-step approach served to increase the external validity of findings. The path model was based on the following predictions:

  + ***Hypothesis 1a.*** A more self-organized team structure will be related to increased knowledge sharing.
  + ***Hypothesis 1b.*** A more self-organized team structure will result in better perceived decision quality.
  + ***Hypothesis 2a.*** TMS will lead to more knowledge sharing.
  + ***Hypothesis 2b.*** TMS will positively influence perceived decision quality.
  + ***Hypothesis 3.*** Increased knowledge sharing will predict higher decision quality.
  + ***Hypothesis 4a & 4b.*** Knowledge sharing will mediate both the effect of team structure on decision quality and the effect of TMS on decision quality.
  + ***Hypotheses 5a & 5b.*** Task interdependence will moderate the second stage of the indirect (positive) relationship of both team structure and TMS to decision quality through knowledge sharing, such that these relationships are stronger when task interdependence is high rather than low.

First, I conducted a cross-sectional survey study at a publicly traded company. I then tested the proposed moderated mediation model in a path analytic framework, using the lavaan package ([Rosseel, 2012](https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v048.i02)). Data from a total of 1129 employees largely confirmed the hypothesized model. Both the degree of self-organization and the development of a TMS were positively related to teams’ perceived decision quality. Improved knowledge sharing among team members partially explained these positive relationships. Results further showed that task interdependence is a moderator of the indirect effects of TMS and team structure on decision quality through knowledge sharing. More precisely, the mediated relationships were stronger for higher levels of task interdependence compared to lower levels of task interdependence.

## Conclusion

Together, the two studies provide strong empirical evidence for the advantage of more autonomous team structures over hierarchical ones in decision making situations that involve a high degree of interdependence. They further point to the supportive role of transactive memory systems (TMSs) in exactly these situations. Additionally, this research started to explore the mechanism underlying the positive effects of self-organization and TMSs. It finds knowledge sharing to be an important mediator for the success of knowledge worker teams. In conclusion, the present work combines previous research on cognitive team processes (e.g., [Lewis, 2003](https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.88.4.587); [Mohammed & Dumville, 2001]( https://doi.org/10.1002/job.86)), hierarchy (e.g., [Anderson & Brown, 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.riob.2010.08.002)), and socio-technical systems theory (e.g., [Cummings, 1978](https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1978.4305900); [Pasmore, Francis, Haldeman, & Shani, 1982](https://doi.org/10.1177/001872678203501207)), thus bridging separate research traditions. Its empirical findings endorse the efforts of organizations to flatten their structures and promote knowledge sharing.



